
# Introduction

Imagine you didn’t have to work at a job to support yourself. What would you do with your time? How would your life be different? Would you move to Southern California, party all night, and go surfing all day long? Would you indulge your lifelong passion for the electric guitar? Would you learn foreign languages and travel to the countries where they are spoken? Would you spend lazy mornings with your kids and work out in the afternoons? Or would you simply get up each morning without a plan, enjoying the ability to spontaneously go where the day takes you?

Human beings have long dreamed of a world of plenty in which nobody needs to work. As Robert and Edward Skidelsky remind us in their book How Much Is Enough, representations of abundance date to the biblical depiction of the Garden of Eden, and to Greek poetry that speaks of a time in which "fruitful earth yielded its abundant harvest of its own accord." More recently, John Maynard Keynes, in his famous 1930 essay "Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren," predicted that "a point may soon be reached, much sooner perhaps than we are all of us aware of, when [our basic needs] are satisfied in the sense that we prefer to devote our further energies to non-economic purposes." Keynes went on to argue that at this point humans would confront a more fundamental challenge: "how to occupy the leisure, which science and compound interest will have won for him, to live wisely and agreeably and well."

Economists and policymakers have long ignored Keynes’ essay, seeing it as too fantastical to take seriously. Yet it is becoming clear that the notion of an abundant world isn’t so fantastical any longer. We have the capacity with current technologies to provide for the basic needs of every man, woman, child on the face of the planet. With rapid advances in technologies, these needs for food, shelter, clothing, education, health care, and Internet access are poised to become much cheaper still. Over the coming decades, every one of us might well be free of the need to work, finding ourselves in the enviable position of exercising complete freedom over how we spend our time. 
