Capitalism — which has gotten us so far — won&apos;t help us much in its present form for reasons that I will         describe shortly. But exactly because we have come so far, we can use regulation and self regulation to give          ourselves significantly more freedom in allocating our attention which will create the room to address both our       individual and collective needs.

Why won&apos;t capitalism help us? Because the great strength and the great weakness of capitalism is that it relies  on prices determined in markets. Prices are amazingly powerful because they efficiently aggregate information on      consumer preference, producer needs, etc. But not everything can be priced. And increasingly the things that cannot   be priced are becoming much more important than those that can.

There are foundational issues that prevent the existence of prices for many things. This is not just a question of a  missing market that can be magically solved by assigning property rights.

The first foundational issue is zero marginal cost for copies and distribution in the digital realm. From a social    perspective we should make all the world&apos;s knowledge, including all the existing music, videos, educational      materials available for free. That&apos;s not just true for content but also for services that can be provided at     essentially zero marginal cost, such as medical diagnoses. I will come to this in much greater detail when discussing how to increase what I call &ldquo;informational freedom.&rdquo;

The second foundational issue is extreme uncertainty. Because prices aggregate information they fail when no such     information can exist. There are events that are so rare or have not occurred at all yet that we have essentially no  information on their frequency or severity. This is especially true around the kind of societal event horizon that we are currently dealing with. Nassim Taleb&apos;s work on tail risk is highly relevant here. The price mechanism cannot work when forecast error is infinite.
